what are the main features in spring boot?
what is difference between bean and component?
what are the starter types in java spring boot?
what is inversion of control?
what is difference between controller and rest controller?
what is parent object file in spring boot?
what is spring boot actuator?
what are stereotype annotation in java spring boot?
What are the annotation types in the spring boot?
what is junit testing in spring boot?
what is hibernate ORM?
what is spring mvc?
what is spring boot profiling?
Is it possible to build non web application through spring boot?

what is marker interface?
It provides run time information about objects and contain no methods and fields.

what is lambda expression?
what is functional interface in spring boot?
Can we declare a static keyword inside method in java?
what is value annotation in spring boot?
what is lombok?
Can we write componenet annotation instead of service, restcontroller and repository?
what is dynamic insertion?
what is lazy loading and eager loading?
what is rest and soap?
what is cascade delete?
what is impedence mismatch?
assert: test your assumption about the program
what is graceful shutdown in spring boot?

How many spring boot have embedded servlet containers?
there are 3: tomcat, jetty and undertow

what is meta annotation?
what does spring web starter do?
it adds tomcat and spring mvc

what is uber jar?
contain java program as well as other dependencies that it needs to be executed
what is custom classifier for executable jar?

what is jruby?
when we need use one project as a dependency into another we will use this custom classifire with the repackage goal

what is aspect oriented programming in spring boot? AOP
to break down the programming language into parts called concerns

what is neo 4g graph database?
what if we do not use spring boot annotations in the main class?
We will then use enable auto configuration and entity scan
what is difference between stringBuilder and StringBuffer?
what is stream of data?
means flow of data

what is list , arraylist and linkedlist in java
heroku(paas = platform as a service) provides developer to build and deploy their entire application on the cloud
another is cloud foundry

what is imperative and declarative appraoch in the programming?
imperative means defining the detail logic, declerative means just show the basic concepts and we achieve through lambda expressions especially

what is finalize in java?
what is predicate in java?
can we have a default and static methods in interface?
what is functional interface in java?

what is difference between default and static methods in interface?
we can implement the dafualt methods of the interface at our own but we use static as it is in our programming

abstract class and interface difference?
abstract class can have abstract methods and non abstract as well but interface has only abstract methods, means these are not defined just declared
if we want only some of the methods of the interface in the implementing class, we will make the class abstract and use the specific method of the interface.

what is difference between maven and gradle?
gradle uses current cache for project developing tools, works on the current dependencies that current project in the running state needs, while maven not

why and how to use environmental variables in ide?
what is spring dispatcher servlet?
what is difference between requestParam and pathvariable in spring boot annotations?
what is the default capacity of arraylist in java?
static members are the part of class where they can access direclty via class name we dont need to instantiate the class
jvm executes the static block code before the loading of main class
what are positional access operators? get, set, add, remove

what is arraylist and list?
The List refers to a collection of various elements in a sequence, in which every element is basically an object. 
Also, we can access these elements by their positions (index). 
sOn the other hand, an ArrayList creates an array (dynamic) of the objects that can easily reduce or increase in size as and when required.

what is elk stack?
What is OIDC and Oauth authentication protocol
what is transport layer security(TLS)?

what is IS-A and HAS-A in java relations?
IS-A relationship represents inheritance, where one class is a specialized version of another class.
HAS-A relationship represents composition or aggregation, where one class contains or is composed of another class.
Aggregation is known as weak association between the two classes
Composition are more tightly coupled means they have strong association

differenece between hashmap and hashtable
difference between arraylist and linkedlist
string builder is not thread safe thats why it is fast

what is micronaut framework?
for implementing microservices with java
micronaut handles dependency injection at compile time right when we are writing the code where as spring boot handles it during runtime

what is jsr?
it is a java specification request annotations like inject, post construct etc, it is mostly used by micronaut framework
micronaut takes less time for run as well uses half of the memory of the spring boot

what is ldap and saml?
ldap = lightweight directory protol, saml= security assertion markup language both are used for spring boot security, but we are currently using jwt

what is difference between static and final keyword in java?
static method means it belongs to itself rather than any instance of the class, means we can access static method by just calling the method,
like className.methodName 
where as final means impossible to inherit or override
we cannot override final and static methods
we can use abstract keyword with class if we dont want to make objects of it, and if one method is abstract the whole class should be declared
abstract, but we use interfaces for this scenarios as now.

what is spring boot caching?
Is CRUD repository a marker interface?
NO. repository is a marker interface
jpaRepository->pagingandsortingrepository->crudrespository->repository

what is difference between oop and functional programming?
oop is imperative and functional programming is declerative
why java is not pure object oriented?
what is difference between RequestParam and PathVariable annotations in spring boot?

what is serializable in java?
Serializable interface in java is a special interface to be implemented by data classes in java. it is also called marker interface 
When a class implements this interface, it can be persisted in a database.
(means we can perform operations in the database by using these types of collections like ArraysList, LinkedLists etc) 

Main difference between arraylist and linkedlist:
adding elements in the middle of an ArrayList is relatively expensive because 
all the elements after the index where the new element is added must be shifted over to make room.
Therefore, if you need to frequently add elements in the middle of a list, LinkedList might be a better choice.it will not move all the elements 
because these are connected through nodes.

what is volatile, transient and synchronized keyword in java?
what is java generics?
what is order and unordered collection in java?
ConcurrentHashMap, hashmap not allows duplicate keys but allows duplicate values
what is set?
In Java, Set does not allows duplicate values

Can we have a duplicate values in list?
what is websocket and polling?
what is java writer?

A Set is a generic set of values with no duplicate elements. 
A TreeSet is a set where the elements are sorted. 
A HashSet is a set where the elements are not sorted or ordered.

What's the purpose of a wrapper class? 
to use it in the generics becuase generics dont allows primitive types

what is difference between primitive and wrapper objects in java?
Wrapper is class used to convert primitive into object where as primitive is predefined keywords and reserved keywords
what is autoboxing and unboxing in java?
why to use wrapper classes in java?
to achieve java program be completed object oriented
why java is not completely object oriented?
becuase it uses some of the primitive data types that are not object based 

what are software design patterns?
These have three types: creational, structural, behavioral
what is buffered reader in java?
what is spring aop?
what is afcon?

what is hashing in java?
Hashing in Java is a technique for mapping data to a secret key, that can be used as a unique identifier for data
Hashmap is faster than Hashset because values are associated with the unique key

what is java stream api?
Streams were introduced in java 8. Stream API is used to process collections of objects. A stream is a sequence of objects
that supports various methods which can be pipelined to produce the desired result. It follows funtional programming style.

What is inversion of control meaning in spring?
Inversion of Control is a principle which transfers the control of objects or portions of a program to a container or framework.

what is java "record" keyword?
what is urn , url and uri?

what is difference between put and post?
Put is idempodent means that if we send a lot of same requests, the only initial request cause a change(multiple requests produce same result)
In contrast, calling a POST request repeatedly have side effects of creating the same resource multiple times.

What are the codes for client side error and server error?
100 means process, 200 ownwards means success, 400  ownwards means client error and 500 means server error

Why should we use String builder in loops instead of String?
Strings are immutable objects, so concatenation doesn’t simply add the new String to the end of the existing string.
Instead, in each loop iteration, the first String is converted to an intermediate object type, the second string is appended,
and then the intermediate object is converted back to a String. Further, performance of these intermediate operations degrades
as the String gets longer. Therefore, the use of StringBuilder is preferred.

What is raw type in java?
it is generic type like List names = new Arraylist(), where as parameterized type is List<String> etc

What is base64 encoding?
What is native image or spring native?
A native image is a technology to build Java code to a standalone executable

What is difference between jdk, jre and jvm?
jdk is the main library kit that provides all necessary files and executable environment along with jre and jvm
jvm tells the compiler to convert the source code(in text form) into byte code(01 form). 
jre provides the environment where the source code run and executed. 

Why java is called better memory management language?
because it automatically performs the garbage collection, thus it is memory efficient language
What is javac?
it is java compiler in that converts source code(text form, .java file) into bytecode(.class file)
It is must to implement the abstract methods of interface in the implementing class whether abstract keyword is written or not,
but not necessary to implement default and static methods.

What are checked and unchecked exceptions?
Can we have more than one public class in same file?
No, only one class should be public that matches the file name, other should be without public keyword
Is JDBC is part of java EE or java SE?
it is a part of java SE
Java EE provide apis for running large scale applications like seperate client, business and enterprise layers
it has jsp, dependency injection, authentication etc
where as java SE is normal java specifications that consists of virtual machines(jvm, jre, jdk), runtime envionment, basics oop concepts, swing etc
If we want to use the two classes(package) within the same class name(main file class name),
we often write in like
class nammee{      // this the class that is occuring in the same file name
     java.util.Date date;
	 
What is difference between actual and formal parameters?
What are literals?
What is String constant pool(scp)?
How garbage collector works?
When String is not refering to the object, then the object is automatically collected by GC.
String is a reference type, String name = "khan";
here name is not storing the value like int = 5; etc, name is only refering or pointing towards "khan" object 
not storing the value.
What is supplier interface in java?
What is consumer interface in java?
What is predicate?
What are fail fast and fail safe iterator?
What is the result of character conactenation in java? like 'j' + 'a' + 'v' + 'a';
it will generate numeric output
What is difference between jdbc and jpa?
What is factory design pattern in java?

What is metaspace in java?
Metaspace is a new memory space – starting from the Java 8 version; it has replaced the older PermGen memory space.
The most significant difference is how it handles memory allocation. Specifically, this native memory region grows automatically by default.
in simple, there are three terms that are most commonly use in data collection, these are List, set and map Define these, their differences and their implementing classes.

What is try with resources in java?
What is idempotent in api?
Can we override a method multiple times in java?
No, only subclass can implement the parents class method
What are the rules for method overloading?
The method names must be the same.
The parameter types must be different.
The return types can be the same or different.
The access modifiers can be the same or different.
The exceptions can be the same or different.

What is difference between == and .equals()?
Is java pass by value or pass by reference?
In summary, Java uses "pass by value" for primitive types and "pass by value of the reference" for objects.
but overall java is strictly pass by value.
What is difference between stack and heap memory?

Is String builder, String buffer and String all are immutable?
No, only String is immutable, String builder and buffer are mutable(changeable)

What is continue keyword in java?
What is serialization and deserialization in java?
Serialization is a mechanism of converting the state of an object into a byte stream. 
Deserialization is the reverse process where the byte stream is used to recreate the actual Java object in memory. 
This mechanism is used to persist the object. The byte stream created is platform independent.
What is byte stream in java?
Byte streams are used to perform input and output of 8-bit bytes.
What is difference between static and transient in java?

What is static block in java?
In Java, a static block executes code before the object initialization.
and it runs without creating instance of that class, it runs when the class loads into the memory
The static blocks always execute first before the main() method in Java because the compiler stores them in memory at the time of class loading and before the object creation.

Can we define a method in main class method?
What is difference between substring and subsequence?
What is the use of transactional annotation in spring boot?
the @Transactional annotation ensures that the for example updateUserDetails method runs within a transaction.
If an exception is thrown during the execution of this method, the transaction will be rolled back, and any changes made to the database will be undone.
Should we use transaction annotation on a private method?
What is propagation in transactional?

What is the git command that is used to rollback and dicard changes to specific commit?
it is git reset --hard [commit-hash]

What is super keyword meaning in the constructor?
extending class constructor contains super invokes the parent class constructor and if it is not extending
then it is calling object class that is the parent of all java classes

Very important feature Passing interface as a parameter in method call in java is lead to polymorphism 
What is workload automation?
What is spring batch?
How to create infinite loops in java? (for, while, do)

What is association?
An Association can be defined as a relationship that has no ownership over another. 
For example, a person can be associated with multiple banks, and a bank can be related to various people, but no one can own the other.
What is aggregation?
The term aggregation refers to the relationship between two classes best described as a “whole/part” and “has-a” relationship.
It contains the reference to another class and is said to have ownership of that class.

What is classloader?
When java program runs it is first loaded by classloader in jvm
Can a thread restart after dead state?
no a thread cannot be restarted after dead state
Java virtul machine is a platform and a specification provides runtime environment for java 
code to be executed independent of an operating system(means it is platform independent) and jre is an implementation fo that specification.
jre provides class tools and libraries and contain standalone jvm.
jre provides run time environment for code to be executed. Where a class code converted into bytecode and runs.
jre includes toolkits, libraries etc.
java development kit includes jre and code libraries and compilers
JDK
│
├── JRE
│   ├── JVM
│   └── Core Java Libraries
│
└── Java Compiler & Development Tools

What are the types of garbage collectors in jvm?
Serial garbage collector, Parallel garbage collector, Concurrent Mark and Sweep Garbage collector, G1 garbage collector, Z garbage collector.
What are the important concepts in jvm?
In addition to garbage collectors, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) encompasses several important concepts and components 
that play a crucial role in the execution of Java programs.
Here are some of the key concepts:
Classloader:
Responsible for loading classes into memory. The JVM uses different classloaders (e.g., Bootstrap, Extension, Application) to load classes from different sources (e.g., system libraries, classpath directories).
Just-In-Time (JIT) Compiler:
Transforms Java bytecode into native machine code for improved execution performance. It dynamically compiles parts of your program that are frequently executed.
Java Heap:
The runtime data area where objects are allocated. It's divided into the Young Generation, Old Generation, and Metaspace (or PermGen in older versions of Java).
Java Stack:
Stores method-specific data like local variables and method call information. Each thread has its own stack.
Native Interface (JNI):
Allows Java code to call native methods written in other languages (e.g., C or C++).
Java Native Interface (JNI):
Enables Java applications to interact with native libraries and code written in other programming languages.
Thread Management:
The JVM is responsible for managing threads, allowing for concurrent execution of Java programs.
Execution Engine:
Executes compiled Java bytecode. It includes the Interpreter (which directly executes bytecode) and the JIT Compiler (which compiles bytecode into native code for improved performance).
Method Area (or PermGen or Metaspace):
Stores metadata about classes and methods. It also stores static fields and constants.
Runtime Data Areas:
These include the Method Area, Java Heap, Java Stack, and Native Method Stack. They represent the memory spaces where data and code are stored during program execution.
Java Virtual Machine Tool Interface (JVMTI):
Provides a way for tools to monitor and instrument running Java applications. It's used for profiling, debugging, and monitoring.
Security Manager:
Controls access to system resources by untrusted code. It's used for security and sandboxing.
Memory Management:
The JVM handles memory allocation and garbage collection to manage the lifecycle of objects.
Exception Handling:
Java's exception handling mechanism is an integral part of the JVM. It allows programs to gracefully handle errors and exceptional conditions.
Profiler:
A tool used for monitoring the performance of a Java application. It can provide insights into CPU usage, memory allocation, and other metrics.

What is performance tuning in jvm?
what are 
Bootstrap class loader
Extensions class loader
System class loader
in jvm?
our code that is written in english like syntax is loaded by system class loader
Boot class loader is main parent of the class loading hirarichy
What is race condition in threads?
What is deadlock, livelock, starvation, thread interference, priority inversion and atomicity violations in threads?
What is concurrent and synchronized?

What are the important concepts of design patterns?
Singelton:
only one instance will be created
Factory:
Factory Pattern is focused on object creation, providing a flexible way to create objects without specifying their concrete classes.
for example shape is interface
Shape shape = new square();
Shape shape = new circle();
etc
Adapter:
like two chargers, one is compitable and other is not so a basic interface and two classes one is compitable other is not
so not compitable class calls the method of compitable class
Strategy:
it is used most for algorithms
one interface and different classes that implements and have their own methods for example sorting

File not found checked exceptions subclasses are:
FileNotFoundException
IOException
EOFException
SocketException
SQLException

What is dependency injection using constructor in java?
What are three primary dependency injection types in java?
1 constructor injection(when needed for the whole class)
2 setter injection(when needed for partial dependency in the classes)
3 method injection(when needed in the method scope only)
pom dependency is relatively different because it provides the external libraries that are needed to use in our project
Why should we use setter methods or constructors?

Important steps that are required in microsevices:
Load balancers
Service registry
failed fast
api gateway

What is difference between spring jpa and spring data jpa?
We use rest controller that is composed of (controller and response body) for response in json or xml
and if we simply use controller annotation with no response body it will send response in string that is resolved by view resolver
What are the main important features in java 17?
1 Records
2 Stream.toList()
3 new switch expressions
4 text blocks for long strings and remove "+" on every line break.

What are the sealed classes and interfaces in java?
What is "permit" keyword in java?
What is view resolver in spring mvc?
Eureka server provided by netflix to discover each other services in an ecosystem
either by hardcoding service urls or by using third party tools or service discovery mechanism like DNS
What is diff between instance variables and class variables?
What is rest assured?
What is meant by coding/programming to the interface?
What is method chaining?
What is time complexity and space complexity?

How to pick a commit from one branch and add it to another?
Through cherry-pick
Which spring boot annotation is used to handle global exceptions?
Controller advice
When to use constructor initialization and when to getter and setter methods?
Can we keep the methods inside interface private and protected?
Serialization when exchanging data from java object to swagger/api:
when a response is sent to the Swagger/OpenAPI endpoint, it typically involves the serialization of Java objects.
Typically through java pojo or DTOs
The process of converting Java objects to JSON or XML is known as serialization.

What is field and constructor injection?
this is field injection and do not need final modifier, we can keep them with private to follow the encapsulation principles:
@Autowired
private UserService userService;
and this is constructor injection:
private final UserService userService;
and then define the constructor for that

How to stash the untracked files also (new files that are added)?
through command: git stash -u
What is fluent interface in java?
If we cannot make object of interface then how we can autowired the repository interface?
When you use @Autowired with a repository interface in Spring, you're not directly creating an instance of the interface itself.
Instead, Spring creates a proxy object that implements the repository interface for you.
This proxy object delegates method calls to the actual implementation provided by Spring Data JPA.

Can we make top level class in java static?
In Java, you cannot declare a top-level class as static.
The static keyword is only allowed for nested classes, interfaces, methods, and variables, but not for top-level classes.
Can we make instance of java static class?

Command to get visual representation and graph of git commits and changes:
gitk
Can we pass method as a parameter in java method?
Yes through functional interface, example = processMethod(ReadLines::printHello);

Define stack, queue, list, set, maps, graph and tree?
What is difference between alter and update in sql?
what is clone method in java?
What is comparator and comparable in java?
The linkedList that is built in java that is implementing list interface is singly or doubly?
What is a method that we use to clear the screen?
System.out.flush();

Which method is used to start a thread?
for establishing a thread we use start() and for execution we use run()
How to connect two or more data bases in one spring boot application?

What is big O of n (O(n)), big O of n square (O(n^2)) , (O(1)) and O(log n)?
Explain the difference between linear search and binary search in terms of time complexity?
What is the maximum capacity of arraylist in java?
What is OUTPUT, DELETED, INSERTED in sql?
Can we define a class inside java method?
If we have parent and 4 multilevel child classes, we make the object of lowest child class, whose constructor will execute first?
What is compile time polymorphism and run time polymorphism?
What is early binding and late binding?
What is composite key in database?
What is the query to set foriegn key into the table?
What is parent class of all exceptions?
Define bi arguments variants of functional interfaces.
How to change git branch name?
What is clustered and non clustered in indexing in database?

What are the important features and uses of kubernetes in microservices?
1 Container Orchestration
2 Service Discovery and Load Balancing
3 Automated Rollouts and Rollbacks
4 Self-Healing
5 Resource Management
6 Configuration and Secret Management
7 Networking and Security
8 Logging and Monitoring
9 Environment Consistency
Summary: Kubernetes enhances the deployment, scaling, management, and operational efficiency of microservices
by providing a comprehensive container orchestration platform. It automates many tasks associated with microservice management,
improves resource utilization, ensures high availability,
and supports continuous delivery practices, making it an essential tool for modern microservice architectures.

what is the role of docker in microservices?
1 Containerization
2 Portability
3 Dependency Management
4 Microservice Scalability
5 Development and Testing

What is feignclient in microservices?
what is the query to select coulumn names where the column contains letter a and b?
What is java API throttling?
What is snake case, pascal case, kebab case and camel case in naming conventions?
What are projections in spring boot?
What is elastic search?
What is meant by caching the value?
What is orchestrator approach in SRP?
What is flatMap in java streams?

What is Supplier, Accumulator, Combiner and Consumer in java?
These are functional interfaces we use in streams that performs:
Supplier: Supplies initial objects (e.g., new ArrayList<>()).
Accumulator: Adds elements into a mutable result container.
Combiner: Combines two partial results (used in parallel streams).
Consumer: Processes elements without returning a value.

Techniques to make less paramters in method call:
1. Encapsulation with Objects
2. Using Builder Pattern
3. Method Overloading
4. Use of Optional and Default Values
5. Dependency Injection
6. Functional Interfaces and Lambdas
7. Separation of Concerns

New features introduced in java 17:
sealed classes
record classes
pattern matching for instance of
text blocks
enhanced switch expression

New features introduced in java 21:
virtual threads
more advanced pattern matching for switch conditions
more advanced record patterns
string templates

What is parameter pollution?

Basic git workflow:
git switch feature             # Switch to the feature (working) branch from main branch
git stash                      # Stash any uncommitted changes (after doing changes)
git pull --rebase origin main  # Pull and rebase with the latest main
git stash pop                  # Restore the stashed changes
git add .                      # Stage all changes
git commit -m "Message"        # Commit the changes
git push origin feature        # Push the branch to remote
And then create a Merge/Pull request to merge working branch to main branch

Spring boot microservices security architecture:
🔍 The Role of AuthenticationWebFilter and ServerAuthenticationConverter
🧱 What Spring Security Does (Traditional Flow)
When you use SecurityWebFilterChain in WebFlux:
Incoming HTTP requests go through a chain of filters.
One of these filters must:
Extract the credentials (e.g., the JWT token).
Wrap them in an Authentication object.
Pass them to a ReactiveAuthenticationManager to authenticate.
But by default, this filter doesn't exist unless you explicitly add it. That's where the AuthenticationWebFilter comes in.

🚫 What Happens Without It
If you only set:
.authenticationManager(jwtReactiveAuthenticationManager)
…but don't wire up the AuthenticationWebFilter, then:
✅ You have a way to validate a token.
❌ But there is no filter to intercept the request, extract the token, and actually call the authentication manager.
The token stays hidden in the HTTP header. Nobody picks it up. So Spring thinks the request is anonymous, and authorization fails.

🔥 Result: You always get Access Denied — even with a valid token.

✅ What AuthenticationWebFilter and ServerBearerTokenAuthenticationConverter Do
Here’s what they accomplish:
🔄 AuthenticationWebFilter
Sits in the security filter chain.
Calls the ServerAuthenticationConverter to extract credentials.
Passes them to the ReactiveAuthenticationManager.
🔍 ServerBearerTokenAuthenticationConverter
Extracts Authorization: Bearer <token> header.
Converts it into a BearerTokenAuthenticationToken or UsernamePasswordAuthenticationToken.
Allows the authentication manager to validate and authenticate the token.

Together, they bridge the gap between incoming HTTP requests and your custom authentication logic.
Imagine you built a perfect lock (ReactiveAuthenticationManager) for your house, but you never connected the doorknob (AuthenticationWebFilter) to the lock.
People try to open the door with the right key (the token), but the lock is never even touched. So they stay locked out.

What is difference between spring mvc and spring webflux?
What is reactive programming?
What is mono and flux in reactive programming?

Every new important changes in every java LTS version:
LTS Version	Focus Areas
Java 8	    Lambdas, Streams, Time
Java 11	    Modularization, HTTP, var
Java 17	    Sealed, Records, Pattern Matching, Text Blocks
Java 21	    Virtual Threads, Pattern Matching (switch), Structured Concurrency


What are the principles of reactive programming?
Publisher: A Publisher is an entity that produces a stream of data. In a reactive system,
this could be a service generating events or data over time.
Subscriber: A Subscriber consumes data emitted by a Publisher. It reacts to data as it arrives,
without blocking or waiting for it all to be available at once.
Subscription: This represents the link between a Publisher and a Subscriber.
It is how the Subscriber subscribes to the Publisher and starts receiving data.
Processor: A Processor acts as both a Publisher and a Subscriber. It allows for data to be transformed as it flows through the stream.
Backpressure: Reactive systems handle backpressure, which ensures that the system does not get overwhelmed by an excessive amount of data.

Important Regex Concepts and Patterns to Learn:
1. Basic Matching:
. (Dot): Matches any character except newlines.
Example: a.b matches acb, axb, a b, etc.

^ and $: Anchors that match the start ^ and end $ of a string.
Example: ^abc matches "abc" only at the start of a string.

2. Character Classes:
[a-z]: Matches any lowercase letter.

[0-9]: Matches any digit.

[^a-z]: Matches any character except lowercase letters.

\d: Matches any digit (same as [0-9]).

\w: Matches any word character (letters, digits, or underscores).

\s: Matches any whitespace character (spaces, tabs, etc.).

3. Quantifiers:
*: Matches 0 or more occurrences of the previous character.

+: Matches 1 or more occurrences of the previous character.

?: Matches 0 or 1 occurrence of the previous character.

{n,m}: Matches between n and m occurrences of the previous character.
Example: \d{2,4} matches between 2 to 4 digits.

4. Grouping and Alternation:
(): Groups patterns together.
Example: (abc|def) matches either "abc" or "def".

|: Alternation (OR).
Example: a|b matches either "a" or "b".

5. Assertions:
Positive Lookahead (?=...): Matches a group only if it is followed by another group.
Example: \d(?=\D) matches a digit only if it's followed by a non-digit.

Negative Lookahead (?!...): Matches a group only if it is NOT followed by another group.
Lookbehind (?<=...): Matches a group only if it's preceded by another group.
Negative Lookbehind (?<!...): Matches a group only if it's NOT preceded by another group.

6. Escape Characters:
Use \ to escape special characters like ., *, +, etc.
Example: \. matches a literal dot (.), not any character.

What are private methods in java interfaces and when were they introduced?

Example illustration of Static method and instance variables of a class:
Static method: Think of a teacher standing in front of the class giving a lecture. The teacher is not associated with any specific student
but is there for the class as a whole.
Instance variable: A student’s grade or name is an instance variable because it’s unique to that student.
Static Variable: Think of a classroom’s total attendance count, which is shared by all students in the class, and it's the same for every student.
The total attendance count is not unique to any individual student, but it's relevant to the entire class.
A teacher (static method) cannot directly access the grades of students (instance variables) without
asking each student individually (i.e., referencing each student’s instance).

Can a class has default methods?
What is completeable future in java?
What is callable and runnable?
What is executor services in java?
What is life cycle of threads?
NEW → RUNNABLE → RUNNING → (BLOCKED / WAITING / TIMED_WAITING) → TERMINATED
What is keyClock in java?

Rules for catching blocks in try catch statement:
Catch blocks are checked top to bottom, and Java uses the first matching catch block.
So if you put the general catch (Exception e) before a more specific one (like catch (IOException e)),
the specific one will be unreachable — and the compiler will throw an error.

🔷 Key Techniques & Design Patterns in Java (especially Java 8+)
🔸 1. Factory Pattern (Creational)
Purpose: Object creation is abstracted.
Where used:
DriverManager.getConnection()
Executors.newFixedThreadPool()
Calendar.getInstance()

🔸 2. Builder Pattern
Purpose: Create complex objects with a step-by-step approach.
Where used:
StringBuilder
Stream.Builder
HttpRequest.newBuilder() (Java 11+)

🔸 3. Singleton Pattern
Purpose: Ensure only one instance of a class exists.
Where used:
Runtime.getRuntime()
Logger.getLogger()
Desktop.getDesktop()

🔸 4. Strategy Pattern
Purpose: Select an algorithm at runtime.
Where used:
Comparator and Collections.sort(list, comparator)
Lambdas in Stream.sorted(Comparator) — Java 8 onward
Custom ThreadFactory for ExecutorService

🔸 5. Decorator Pattern
Purpose: Add behavior dynamically without modifying the object.
Where used:
InputStream, OutputStream (e.g., BufferedInputStream, DataInputStream)
Collections.unmodifiableList(), synchronizedList() (adds behavior like immutability or thread-safety)

🔸 6. Observer Pattern
Purpose: One-to-many dependency — observers get notified of state changes.
Where used:
java.util.Observer (now deprecated, but still illustrative)
PropertyChangeListener in JavaBeans
GUI event listeners (Swing/AWT)

🔸 7. Command Pattern
Purpose: Encapsulate a request as an object.
Where used:
Runnable (Runnable is a command object — you pass it and execute later)
Executors / Thread Pools
GUI event handling

🔸 8. Adapter Pattern
Purpose: Allow incompatible interfaces to work together.
Where used:
Arrays.asList() (adapts array to List)
InputStreamReader (adapts InputStream to Reader)

🔸 9. Template Method Pattern
Purpose: Define the program skeleton but allow subclasses to fill steps.
Where used:
AbstractList, AbstractMap, AbstractSet
HttpServlet.doGet() and doPost() (Java EE)

🔸 10. Proxy Pattern
Purpose: Control access to another object.
Where used:
java.lang.reflect.Proxy (dynamic proxies — common in Spring, AOP)
RMI (Remote Method Invocation)
JDBC connection pools (wrap/monitor actual connections)

Streams API (Java 8)
Java 8 Streams — how they work + intermediate vs terminal?
The Streams API (a major Java 8 feature) applies several patterns:
Builder Pattern – via Stream.Builder
Pipeline Pattern – stream.filter().map().collect()
Strategy Pattern – via custom Comparator, Predicate, etc.
Iterator Pattern – internally abstracts traversal

Java SE and Java EE:
If Java SE is your toolbox, Java EE is your workshop for building large-scale systems.
Java SE includes:
1. Basic language features: String, Collections, Exceptions
2. I/O: File, InputStream, Reader, etc.
3. Concurrency: Thread, ExecutorService, synchronized, etc.
4. Networking: Socket, URL, etc.
5. JDBC: Connect to databases
6. JavaFX or AWT/Swing (for GUI)
7. Java 8+ features: Streams, Lambdas, Optional, etc.

Java EE includes:
1. Servlets (Web APIs)
2. JSP (JavaServer Pages) and JSF (JavaServer Faces)
3. EJB (Enterprise JavaBeans) (older component model)
4. JPA (Java Persistence API) – ORM (like Hibernate)
5. JMS (Java Messaging Service) – messaging between apps
6. JAX-RS / JAX-WS – REST and SOAP web services
7. CDI (Contexts and Dependency Injection)
8. Bean Validation, Security, and more

Example of encapsulation in java OOP design:
Think of a Real-World Analogy:
Imagine a vending machine:
You can't open it and take snacks directly (like accessing public fields).
Instead, you press buttons and insert money (like calling methods).
The machine controls what happens — it checks if you paid, if the item is available, etc.
That’s encapsulation in action. You're interacting with a system, but you don't get to break or misuse it just because you can see it.
so that means Encapsulation is not about restricting access completely — it’s about controlling behavior when access happens. 

Concept of class loader in JVM:
Think of the .java → .class compilation as baking a cake (you prepare the file ahead of time). This is done through java compiler (javac)
The ClassLoader just takes the finished cake (the .class file) and serves it to the JVM — it does not do any baking (compilation).
So it loads the .class files into JVM

In Java, Method Overloading depends solely on:
1. Same method name
2. Different parameter list, which includes:
   Number of parameters
   Types of parameters
   Order of parameters (if types differ)
Overloading Does Not Depend On but may have different:
Return type
Access modifier
Exceptions thrown
Parameter names

What is covariant return in method overriding?
What is difference between generic type and unknown type in java generics?
What is server thread pool?

Example: Two Apps with the Same Logic
App A: Spring MVC (blocking)
App B: WebFlux (non-blocking)
Both call a slow API or DB that takes 300ms
Both return JSON response after the call
Both will take ~300ms to return the response
❗ WebFlux won’t make that faster — but it will let more users be served during that time through server thread pool system in a server.
By default, Spring WebFlux uses Netty as its embedded server.

What is servlet?
A Servlet is a Java object that handles HTTP requests and generates responses.
It's part of the Java Servlet API — a core part of Java EE (now Jakarta EE).
In spring mvc, the servlet container is tomcat
So Spring MVC is Servlet-based
and Spring WebFlux is Reactive

Runnable thread:
Method: void run()
Usage: with Thread or ExecutorService
Limitations: Cannot return a result or throw a checked exceptions

Callable thread:
Method: v call() throws execption
Usage: ExecutorService.submit() with returns future
Can return a result and throw checked exceptions

Future:
Methods: get() : blocks until result is available
Usage: Returned by submitting a Callable to an ExecutorService

CompleteableFuture:
Can be manually completed
Supports chaining like thenApply(), thenAccept(), thenCompose()

Type	              Returns Result	 Can Throw Exception	     Asynchronous	Cancelable	      Introduced In      Type
Runnable	          No	              No	                       Yes	           No	             Java 1.0       Interface
Callable<V>	          Yes	              Yes	                       Yes	           Yes (via Future)	 Java 5         Interface
Future<V>	          Yes (via get)	      No (itself doesn't throw)	   Yes	           Yes	             Java 5         Interface
CompletableFuture<V>  Yes	              Yes	                       Yes	           Yes	             Java 8          Class




